hi everyone my name is Dr Mark Henson
welcome to heal NPD this is part two of
a four-part series exploring the
narcissistic personality style across
different levels of severity in part one
we explored psychotic level NPD and laid
the foundation for understanding The
Core Concepts used throughout this
series if you haven't seen that one yet
go check it out first I'll put a link in
the description today we're exploring
narcissistic personality disorder
organized at the borderline level we'll
talk about what that means and why it's
important along the way we'll explore
how identity develops what defines
personality disorders and why so many
personality disorders share overlapping
symptoms by the end you'll have a much
better understanding of what separates
narcissistic traits from full-blown NPD
and why there's real hope for Meaningful
change through treatment so let's get
started
[Music]
in part one we talked about the
difference between personality style and
personality organization personality
style looks at the core conflicts and
beliefs that sit at the very center of
someone's personality for example
narcissistic styles are focused on
self-esteem issues depressive styles on
feelings of loss and paranoid styles on
perceived threats but personality style
alone doesn't tell us whether someone is
healthy or dis functional in fact most
people have a mix of Personality Styles
although there's typically one that's
more prominent they're like different
shades on a color wheel each has its own
Hue but none is inherently better or
worse than the others if we want to talk
about health versus dysfunction then we
need to look at personality organization
using the color wheel metaphor if
personality style is like the Hue of a
color then personality organization is
like the color's saturation if indicates
how intensely the core conflicts of a
personality style affect the person's
overall mental health whether or not we
consider someone to have a personality
disorder depends on their personality
organization not their personality style
it tells us How Deeply the core
conflicts penetrate how much anxiety or
distress they produce and how
effectively the individual manages them
personality organization describes a
person's object relations object
relations is a broad construct that
includes self-image the ability to see
the self and others in flexible and
accurate ways and the relationships
between different parts of the self
including the internalized relationships
we all have inside of us from childhood
at the higher end of this spectrum we
find mature object relations where
self-image is well defined stable and
integrated and where there's an ability
to relate to others as whole people who
are separate and distinct from the self
at the lower end we find immature object
object relations where the boundaries
between self and others are blurry the
distinction between internal and
external experience is not well defined
and conflicts dominate the personality
this is the actual definition of
personality disorder it's not based on
the personality style it's based on the
individual's ability to cope it's not
the color it's the
saturation specifically personality
disorders occur exclusively in the two
lowest levels of Personality
organization which are called psychotic
and borderline last time we discussed
the psychotic level where identity is
fragile and where there's little to no
distinction between inside versus
outside the self thoughts feelings and
perceptions from Inside the Mind may
feel as though they're happening in the
external world or vice versa and this
creates psychotic experience psychotic
organization is marked by the use of
immature defenses that distort reality
and break the personality into
disconnected fragments creating confused
and disjointed states of Mind these
issues resemble the kinds of experiences
that are thought to occur in very early
childhood when the dividing line between
the self and others is still fluid and
unstable given good enough experience
most individuals develop a core Identity
or self-image this core self-image is a
crucial step toward developing
well-defined stable object relations
without it self-experience is
continually created and lost like
designs on a Sandy Beach that are simply
washed away by the tide sanity requires
a kernel of self that is stable and not
subject to Invasion or contamination by
the external World once such a kernel is
reliably established the individual's
object relations progress from psychotic
to borderline organization borderline
organization isn't the same as
borderline personality disorder or BPD
although BPD gets its name from this
level borderline organization sits quote
on the border of psychotic organization
it's an in between level where reality
testing is mostly intact but still
unstable the boundaries of self are
blurry and still somewhat variable and
parts of the self remain unintegrated
with the rest of the personality the
fundamental issue here is self-de the
Blurred boundaries between self and
others cause a constant struggle between
feelings of separateness and feelings of
symbiotic merger with neither State
feeling totally comfortable
psychologist and author Nancy McWilliams
writes the borderline person alternates
between symbiotic attachment and hostile
isolated separateness both states are
upsetting one raises the Spectre of
engulfment the other of desertion end
quote we aren't necessarily talking
about physical experiences of separation
or merger more like subjective feelings
of isolation versus belonging in
borderline States there's an internal
drive towards self-de that's
counterbalanced by intense fears of
Abandonment the person is caught between
the need to be a separate self and the
feeling that the self can't survive on
its own borderline individuals rely on
others both to provide organization and
cohesion to self- experience and also to
function as a sort of surface against
which the self can be contrasted and
defined increased self-definition brings
feelings of isolation and emptiness a
state that James Masterson called
abandonment depression
experiences of closeness dissolve into
feelings of engulfment triggering
aggressive attempts to separate while
fears of Separation lead to desperate
attempts to merge in narcissistic
personalities organized at this level
ambivalence between merger and
separation manifests as cycles of
idealization and devaluation
idealization seeks merger and
devaluation seeks separation the blurry
ambivalent self-experience that
characterizes borderline organization is
called identity diffusion according to
psychiatrist and psychoanalyst Otto
kernberg quote the presence or absence
of identity diffusion differentiates
borderline from non- borderline
character pathology end quote people
with identity diffusion struggle to see
themselves and others in a clear
consistent way their descriptions of
themselves and other people can feel
contradictory or one-dimensional
individuals with identity diffusion may
also change their self-concept in real
active or even Extreme Ways redefining
who they are and what they want from
moment to moment and situation to
situation I've heard such individuals
describe themselves as chameleons or
people Pleasers able to adopt whatever
qualities seem necessary in the moment
sometimes this is conscious but often
it's not MC Williams writes quote the
experience of self is likely to be full
of inconsistency and discontinuity when
asked to describe their personalities
they may like psychotic level patients
be at a loss and when asked to describe
important people in their lives they
often give Global dismissive
descriptions end quote borderline
organization is thought to reflect a
failure to develop the ego functions
that are required to maintain a fully
individuated and integrated self-image
one that doesn't repeatedly collapse
into merged states where the self is
confused with others numerous theorists
have pointed to an early stage of
psychological development called the
Repro M subphase as the most likely
point of fixation the Repro Mal subphase
occurs around Age Two and during this
time young children want autonomy but
fear abandonment it's a time that's
marked by extreme power struggles pushes
toward Independence and pulls for
closeness successfully navigating this
period requires a lot from caregivers
patience flexibility firm boundaries
clear communication warmth and the
ability to tolerate being raged at by
someone who also needs you desperately
if successful then children emerge with
a flexible and independent sense of self
one that permits them to create
increasingly coherent and integrated
object relations as they grow into
adulthood we need both merger and
separation to build a positive stable
individuated self but the right balance
is highly individual it depends on the
child the circumstances and the stage of
development for example babies need
concrete experiences of merger because
they help establish a baseline of love
and safety that serve as a foundation
for selfhood but children in the Repro
subphase have already developed a basic
sense of self and they now require
encouragement toward autonomy plus warm
reassurance when they become overwhelmed
too much merger discourages further
development of an autonomous self
resulting in continued identity
diffusion and profound Reliance on
others too much separation creates a
false self in the child that pretends to
be independent when it's still symbiotic
this is a common configuration in NPD
where the child has endured pervasive
lapses in attuned empathic caregiving
being misunderstood mischaracterized or
overvalued for parts of the self while
undervalued for others produces
premature and traumatic experiences of
separateness that require the child to
construct a defensive island of
self-experience experience one that can
function
independently this false self becomes
very good at reflecting what the
environment seems to want and is thus
able to receive limited conditional love
and approval however the island of false
self exists in a sea of identity
diffusion parts of the self remain stuck
in a symbiotic mode of object relations
unable to cohere and individuate because
the necessary relational experiences are
simply not available the false self
might appear to function quite well
there can be Insight limited use of
mature defenses like intellectualization
and a clear albeit grandiose self-image
Otto kernberg writes quote patients with
borderline personality organization
typically present identity diffusion but
narcissistic personalities present an
important complication in this respect
the narcissistic personality usually has
an integrated self-concept but the
concept is pathological and grandiose
end quote however the false self is
prone to collapse during periods of
emotional overwhelm when the individual
is plunged back into the sea of identity
diffusion often causing severe
depression anxiety and Reliance on
borderline level defenses the right
balance between merger and separation is
hard to strike luckily things don't have
to be perfect just good enough there
will be times when the caregiver's
response doesn't match the child's need
means creating experiences of Separation
but those must be counterbalanced by an
overall sense that the self is safe
understood and loved some children need
more merger some more separation the
most important factor seems to be the
goodness of fit between what the child
needs and what caregivers provide when
there's a significant mismatch
relational trauma can occur causing
immature object relations to persist
into adulthood that being said there is
a wide range of severity within the
borderline Spectrum when most people
imagine someone with a personality
disorder they're likely picturing
someone at the mid to lower end of this
range at the higher end individuals may
have surprising levels of insight using
a mix of immature and healthier defenses
recognizing borderline organization in
high functioning individuals can
actually take months of therapy
borderline organization can be
recognized by the frequent use of
certain psycholog iCal defenses these
defenses are caused by the issues with
identity and boundaries that
characterize borderline psychologies the
defense mechanisms rating scales or dmrs
categorizes borderline level defenses as
quote immature and this reflects the
developmental arrests that contribute to
borderline
psychologies most immature defenses have
both borderline and psychotic versions
with the key difference being the extent
of reality Distortion psychotic defenses
cause significant reality ity
distortions while borderline defenses
create only minor distortions in fact
the first category of immature defense
on the dmrs is called minor image
distorting defenses these defenses
protect the individual from experiences
that threaten self-esteem such as
failure criticism or disappointment and
they include idealization devaluation
and
omnipotence idealization at the
borderline level idealization is
unrealistic but not significantly
reality distorting flaws are usually
acknowledged but sort of glossed over or
dismissed as unimportant the main
function is to counterbalance deeper
feelings of worthlessness or
vulnerability for example someone with
NPD might idealize a new boss viewing
them as the ultimate authority figure
who can do no wrong they might say
things like my boss is a genius
everything they touch turns to gold or
they're the smartest person I've ever
met this idealization may help the
individ will feel more important by
association as if their connection to
this powerful figure elevates their own
self-worth idealization is also used in
other personality disorders for instance
individuals with BPD often idealize new
romantic Partners while those with
depressive personality disorder may
idealize past relationships or qualities
of the self that now feel irretrievably
lost
devaluation this is the opposite of
idealization it's when an individ idual
attributes exaggerated negative
qualities to themselves others or
objects through devaluation they can
feel powerful over others or in control
of perceived flaws in themselves it can
also defend against disappointment or
shame over unmet emotional needs sort of
like saying I didn't need that person
anyway to avoid grief popular
representations of NPD focus on
devaluation of other people the
so-called discard phase when the
idealize ations or love bombing shift to
harsh critical treatment and the person
or relationship is suddenly viewed as
entirely bad or
worthless however devaluations of the
self also occur in NPD particularly
during the vulnerable phases of the
disorder when the individual is at
increased risk for depression anxiety
self harm or even suicide devaluation is
used in other personality disorders as
well individuals with BPD May devalue
themselves or other people when they
feel abandoned or rejected individuals
with depressive personality disorder
often devalue themselves in order to
control the pain of a traumatic loss
individuals with obsessive compulsive
personality disorder may devalue people
or situations that they see as messy
unclean or defiled and individuals with
dependent personality disorder may
devalue themselves while idealizing the
object of their dependency preserving a
feeling of powerlessness while basking
in the idealized glow of their love
object omnipotence this is when
individuals cope with emotional conflict
or stress by exaggerating their own
power abilities or influence this allows
them to feel Superior to other people as
if they possess special skills
intelligence or authority that somehow
set them apart having an inflated sense
of control or invulnerability protects
them from deeper feelings of inadequacy
or
worthlessness in NPD the grandio
self-image is typically comprised of
omnipotent and idealized attributes
someone with NPD might insist that
they're always right that their way is
the best or that others should simply
defer to their better judgment such
demands often defend against an
underlying negative self-image and deep
insecurities omnipotence is also used in
other personality disorders depressive
individuals often take too much
responsibility for failures or
disappointments and this leads to
exaggerated guilt and feelings of
worthlessness when things go wrong
individuals with BPD May unconsciously
believe that they can quote make someone
love them and antisocial individuals
often believe they're Superior and
entitled to control others without
Consequence the next category focuses on
disavowal defenses these defenses
protect the individual from upsetting or
threatening realities but they don't
usually involve psychotic distortions of
reality they include denial projection
and introjection and skitso fantasy
denial this is when an individual
refuses to acknowledge or accept
upsetting realities in order to avoid
emotional distress or protect their
self-esteem denial operates at an
unconscious level allowing the
individual to maintain a distorted or
selective view of themselves their
relationships or the world around them
at the borderline level denial is not
significantly reality distorting it's
more like not noticing something that's
upsetting or or not feeling as though
the upsetting thing were real it can
involve refusing to believe facts or
evidence minimizing the consequences of
behavior or refusing to acknowledge
difficult emotional truths individuals
with NPD often refuse to acknowledge
personal flaws or vulnerabilities that
threaten their self-image they may
dismiss valid criticisms as jealousy or
ignorance or they may deny the emotional
impact of their behavior on other people
they may also use denial to avoid
respons ibility for harm caused in
relationships denial is also common in
other personality disorders depressive
individuals may refuse to acknowledge
their own positive traits paranoid
individuals may deny the possibility
that people around them actually have
neutral or even positive intentions
dependent individuals may deny their
capacities for self-sufficiency
downplaying any signs of personal
strength or competence in order to
preserve a powerless
self-image projection and introjection
projection involves attributing
qualities of the self to other people
while introjection is the reverse
incorporating the qualities of other
people into the self projection is a way
of unconsciously expelling unwanted
aspects of
self-experience in borderline
personalities the self structure is
unable to balance internal
contradictions so boundaries of the self
are sometimes redrawn to externalize
negative qualities or experiences
basically it's not me it's you because
they represent parts of the self these
projections can't really be gotten rid
of and they must be projected repeatedly
to maintain the illusion projection
leads to interpersonal conflict creating
cycles of blame and misunderstanding the
person projecting is not able to see the
true source of the problem within
themselves in NPD projection is used to
maintain a favorable self-image by
dising threatening feelings like
jealousy and adequacy or Shame by
externalizing these emotions the
individual can avoid the distress that
comes from recognizing these traits
within themselves for example someone
with NPD May accuse other people of
being weak or inadequate rather than
confronting their own feelings of
insecurity but the door swings both ways
introjection is where an individual
unconsciously adopts the thoughts
behaviors or attitudes of another person
often someone significant in their life
such as a parent a authority figure or
partner instead of projecting unwanted
feelings outward introjection involves
internalizing qualities or attitudes of
other people making them part of the
individual's own self-concept basically
it's not you it's me introjection can
also serve protective and adaptive
functions it allows us to maintain
emotional closeness to important figures
particularly in childhood by
internalizing their values beliefs or
behaviors however it can also lead to
difficulties if the internalizations are
negative or harmful for example if a
child injects the harsh criticism of an
abusive parent then they may develop
punitive self-critical attitudes
sometimes these are so strong that they
can cause suicidal ideation or self harm
in NPD introjects form the basis for
positive self-object experiences
so-called narcissistic Supply this is
when compliments or admiration are
internalized as parts of the self
however because the injects are parts of
another person that have been sort of
claimed for the self the individual
can't sustain the self-esteem boost and
constantly needs fresh admiration to
maintain the illusion projection and
injection are also widely used defense
mechanisms across different personality
disorders schizoid fantasy schizoid
fantasy involves Retreat into an inner
world of fantasy to escape from
overwhelming stressful or threatening
real life situations
this defense allows the person to avoid
dealing with external pressures
conflicts or Relationships by immersing
themselves in imagined scenarios where
they feel safe powerful or in control
while adaptive in childhood persistent
use of schizoid fantasy in adulthood
often signals significant difficulties
with emotional regulation and
interpersonal relationships for
individuals with NPD particularly those
with interpersonal avoidance or a
secondary schizoid personality Style
schizoid fantasy can be a primary coping
strategy they may spend hours absorbed
in grandiose fantasies where they see
themselves as powerful or attractive for
some individuals fantasies may also
contain themes of Revenge and these are
used to cope with feelings of inadequacy
Envy or
rejection the final category is Major
image distorting defenses here we find
two defenses that really Define the
borderline level they're called
splitting and projective
identification splitting splitting is
the key to understanding many of the
instabilities that we associate with
personality disorders it causes
fundamental divisions in the individual
self-image and perceptions of other
people splitting is often mistakenly
called black and white thinking but it's
more than a cognitive issue it's an
identity disturbance in borderline
organization the self is unstable and
prone to overwhelming emotions and
polarized perceptions upsetting
experiences aren't just uncomfort
comfortable they often feel traumatic as
BPD expert Marsha linahan describes it
quote they're like people with third
degree burns over 90% of their bodies
lacking emotional skin they feel Agony
at the slightest touch end quote
splitting helps contain the devastation
and Pain by separating parts of the self
into isolated containers sort of like
siloed parts of the self internal
communication between these parts is
often limited such division or splits in
the personality protect the person from
being overwhelmed by trauma Bound images
of the self and other people splitting
is remarkably effective but it's also
costly it's a defense that we all use in
early childhood it allows us to preserve
self-esteem and to protect important
attachment Relationships by keeping the
bad separate from the good we avoid the
anxiety or confusion that comes from
recognizing both positive and negative
traits in ourselves or other people
before we have the ego function to
balance these
contradictions over time most people
integrate positive and negative feelings
into a cohesive whole but in borderline
organizations this ability is not
reliably developed often due to Chronic
relational trauma or adverse childhood
experiences the person gets stuck with
polarized All or Nothing views of the
self and other people that limit insight
and cause cause significant
interpersonal disruptions relationships
become a cycle of repeating traumas as
the individual shifts between idealizing
and devaluing internal States one moment
they may see themselves in other people
as good but a small trigger like a tone
of voice or a phrase can cause them to
shift to the negative side of the split
from this perspective the self is
experienced as weak or unworthy and
other people as hurtful or dangerous in
that moment believe these perceptions
completely leading to extreme Behavior
like yelling or sobbing hurling
accusations or devaluing the entire
relationship later they may be unable to
connect to what they thought or did in
this state of mind and this is one
reason that apologies from individuals
with borderline organization can feel
shallow why they can't seem to sustain
meaningful change and why they can seem
to be completely in love with someone
one minute and absolutely hate their
guts the next it's important to
understand that none of this is
performative it isn't a form of
deception the individual who is
splitting sincerely believes their All
or Nothing worldview in that moment and
they typically have little to know
insight about the extreme dichotomies in
their thinking and behavior in NPD
splitting May manifest as swings between
a grandiose and devalued self-experience
when praised or admired the person may
feel grandiose and Superior but when
criticized or faced with failure they
may feel humiliated and worthless
leading to sudden devaluation of
themselves or other people this devalued
self-image is often filled with feelings
of Rage shame and unmet emotional needs
OT kernberg writes quote at the very
bottom lies the image of a hungry
enraged empty self full of impotent
anger at being frustrated and fearful of
a world which seems as hateful and
revengeful as the patient himself end
quote splitting is also a Hallmark
defense in BPD where it drives much of
the emotional disregulation and dramatic
behavior that characterize the disorder
projective identification this defense
exemplifies the Blurred boundaries of
borderline organization it involves
unconsciously projecting unwanted
feelings thoughts or parts of the self
onto someone else and then interacting
with that person in such a way that it
pressures them to feel those projections
as though they were their own emotions
for example someone with NPD might
project feelings of worthlessness or
inadequacy onto their partner and then
behave in a way that causes their
partner to actually feel worthless in
this way the partner identifies with the
projections they take them on as their
own
feelings sometimes the popular concept
of narcissistic abuse is used to
describe the cumulative effects of
projective identification in a
relationship where a significant other
or family member has been heavily
criticized or provoked to the point
where they begin to doubt their own
reality or
self-worth however projective
identification is not specific to NPD
it's also encountered in other
personality disorders although it can
seem confusing there's nothing magical
going on here it's entirely possible to
perceive someone through the lens of
your own unconscious conflicts and to
treat that person in a way that causes
them to feel whatever it is that you are
trying not to acknowledge in yourself in
early childhood projective identific
ation can be beneficial because it
conveys emotional experiences to
caregivers that the child is too young
to articulate the infant's cries create
a feeling of emergency or distress in
the caregiver that is similar to the
child's internal State projective
identification serves a similar function
in therapy where challenging patients
often provoke the therapist to feel the
same feelings of powerlessness
ineffectiveness or anger that the
patient is trying to manage in
themselves recognizing these
provocations as a regressed form of
emotional communication has helped
countless therapists better understand
the inner lives of their borderline
patients all of these defenses mildly
distort reality blur the boundaries
between the self and others or disrupt
the continuity of self-experience and
this is what defines them as borderline
level defenses they reflect identity
defusion lack of clear boundaries and
emotional and psychological confusion
most of them are are also
interpersonally provocative creating
dysfunction in relationships many of
them involve mistaking something that's
inside the self for something that
belongs to other people or failing to
recognize the complexity of human
emotions and motivations instead
collapsing situations into
oversimplified polarized perceptions
that cause others to feel blamed or
misunderstood these unconscious
distortions can lead to maladaptive or
even harmful behaviors that seem
reasonable to the person in the moment
they push perceptions of the self and of
other people into extreme categories
those in relationships with such
individuals might reasonably conclude
that the person is actually a diabolical
liar and manipulator when the individual
is wildly derogatory and devaluing one
moment and then shifts to viewing
themselves as the aggrieved party in the
next moment it has every appearance of
intentional and cynical manipulation
strategies like
gaslighting I'm not attempting to excuse
manipulative or abusive behavior in most
circumstances individuals with
borderline organizations have sufficient
contact with reality to be accountable
for their actions but borderline issues
do involve significantly skewed
perceptions of the self and others and
Reliance on unconscious defense
mechanisms that blur boundaries and that
prevent the individual from having full
awareness of what they're doing and why
they're doing it it's a level of object
relations where reality floats in and
out of clear focus when emotionally
overwhelmed the individual May regress
back to a level of object relations that
is basically psychotic and when things
are going well they may appear to
function at or near the neurotic level
where the self-concept is integrated and
stable it's a confusing somewhat
disturbing range of psychological
functioning so what does someone with
NPD look like at the borderline level
well remember in borderline
organizations the person 's core
conflicts and preoccupations dominate
the personality in NPD this means that
all or most of the person's perceptions
thoughts feelings and behaviors will in
some way be about self-image and
self-esteem borderline organization is
also marked by internal instability so
the individual's self-image may be
widely variable moving unpredictably
from the heights of grandiosity to the
depths of Shame and self-loathing the
period or frequency of these transitions
varies from person to person but all
individuals with NPD organized at this
level experience extremes in self-image
that are distorted yes but that also
retain some connection to reality a
smart person may consider themselves to
be a genius an attractive person may
think of themselves as runway model
material social interactions are also
distorted but Loosely reality based
someone who gave the person a compliment
might be described as obsessed with them
them Etc negative self-perceptions are
similarly distorted whatever the
veilance of self-perception be it
positive or negative it will also be
unstable and based on splitting the
person will alternate between grandiose
and devalued splits in the self
grandiosity is marked by idealization
omnipotence and denial of emotional
needs the person may experience soaring
self-esteem expansive attitudes and
behaviors feelings of superiority or
omnibenevolence
or they may experience disdain for
people onto whom they've projected
feelings of worthlessness or inadequacy
in grandio States the person may have no
memory or subjective awareness of ever
having felt differently which can lead
to outrageously insensitive or cruel
Behavior the subjective dissociation
from any and all vulnerability or
emotional need make it difficult for
individuals in grandio states to
empathize with other people or to offer
a sincere apology for their actions it
really is hard to overstate the Euphoria
of grandiosity in Borderland level NPD
however the inherent instability of
grandio self-perception can also cause
anxiety and pressure to quote perform
such pressure is itself destabilizing
and typically hastens the inevitable
collapse into vulnerable self- States
the inflated self-esteem of narcissistic
grandiosity relies on the defenses we've
discussed to continually deny project or
split off insecurities and
vulnerabilities but eventually such
feelings become overwhelming leading to
self-esteem collapse now on the other
side of the grandiose vulnerable split
the person with NPD is exposed to
devalued or empty self-experience that
is dominated by attachment anxiety rage
dependency shame and overt mistrust of
other people feelings of inadequacy
insecurity and social anxiety become
prominent they may also experience
illness anxiety paranoia panic attacks
and depression the collapse into
vulnerability is made worse by the
pressure that the individual feels to
get back to the grandiose
self-experience they may feel as though
they've somehow lost their quote real
self even though what they're
experiencing in collapse is simply the
other side of the coin vulnerability in
NPD can involve hopeless empty agonizing
states of Mind those around the
individual often notice the stark
contrast between vulnerable and
grandiose States but the individual
themselves may not notice they may deny
or minimize the differences failing to
recognize the obvious cycles of
self-esteem inflation and self-esteem
collapse those around them may also try
to help with reassurances and emotional
support but they're often met with help
rejecting behaviors that actualize the
individual's feelings of hopelessness
the only real solution is treatment the
therapist and patient together must
weather these storms of grandiosity and
collapse during periods of grandiosity
the therapist must find ways to hold
onto the reality of the patient
vulnerability and during periods of
vulnerability the therapist must find
ways to hold the patient's hope the goal
is integration to forge a more stable
realistic coherent self-image that is
well- defined and better able to
tolerate and contain the core conflicts
that Define the narcissistic personality
Style
according to MC Williams quote the aim
of therapy for people with borderline
psychologies is the development of an
integrated stable complex and positively
valued sense of self end quote such work
can take a long time and there may be
periods especially at the beginning when
it seems like things are actually
getting worse as the individual's
defenses begin to break down they're
often exposed to underlying negative
devalued images of the self and other
people
there are typically numerous unconscious
attempts to sabotage disrupt or
terminate treatment because it doesn't
feel to the person that anyone
themselves included could survive the
full weight of unprocessed emotion that
lies buried in their vulnerable
self-experience the only way to treat
the disjointed internal experience of
borderline organization is to go through
it it's a collaborative Endeavor between
therapist and patient such a path can
seem hopeless ly Tangled but when we
reflect on the relational experiences
that produce mature object relations we
see a similar tangle it's just spread
out over the years of Early Childhood
feelings of hopelessness Terror rage
dependency distorted self-perceptions
confusion emotional disregulation and
immature coping are frequent features of
Early Childhood experience in borderline
organizations the environment wasn't a
good enough fit to help the child with
these feelings and the individual grew
into an adult who continues to struggle
with them in treating borderline issues
both the therapist and patient are
exposed to powerful and intense feelings
contradictory perceptions of the self
and other people and limit testing that
would absolutely destroy normal
relationships these issues require the
boundaries and safety of a therapeutic
space and the training and insight of a
therapist who can recognize the pushes
and pulls for what they really represent
MC Williams writes quote along with
integration goes the evolution of a
capacity to love other people fully
despite their flaws and contradictions
and the ability to tolerate and regulate
a wide range of emotions and quote the
ego functions that help us to integrate
and individuate are forged through
relational experiences we internalize
these capacities from those around us a
phenomenon that Hines kohut called
transmuting internal ization in time it
is possible to bring the siloed parts of
the self together and to weave an
integrated tapestry of
self-experience individuals with
borderline organization can learn to see
and love themselves and other people in
three dimensions these capacities are
not forever Out Of Reach they've simply
not yet been
developed okay so that's it for today
the next video in this series will
explore the narcissistic style organized
at the neurotic level where self-image
and boundaries are much more stable and
well- defined allowing the individual to
experience new feelings that weren't
possible before such as grief and Paving
the way for the use of more
sophisticated defenses that are also
less disruptive to
relationships as always if you found
this video helpful feel free to give it
a like or to share with your friends and
until next time take good care
[Music]